---
layout: post
permalink: /ds/pay-gap/
title: Measuring Pay Gaps
abstract: All companies in the UK of a certain size are required to publicly report their gender pay gap. This might seem like a straightforward exercise, but without careful thought it is possible to reach a conclusion which inadvertently distorts the real story in the data.
level: easy
date: 2018-04-10
categories: data-science
comments: true
---

There is a well-documented gap between men's and women's pay for equivalent work in most countries; see [here][2] for the US numbers, for instance.
The exact nature and causes of this pay gap are not completely understood, and consequently the UK passed a law requiring every company with at least 250 employees to report gender pay gap statistics both publicly and to the government.
I happen to work for a British company called [Brandwatch][1], and while we don't quite have 250 employees in the UK we decided to report our gender pay gap numbers anyway.

I am not sufficiently fluent in labor economics to dive into the thornier issues in the debate over pay equality, but my company's pay gap data exhibited a tricky statistical quirk which I would like to explore in detail.
It is not really specific to gender or pay, but rather it is a real world case-study illustrating some of the arguments that I made in my [previous post][3] on how to properly think about averages.
The upshot is that one should think very critically about whether a reported average actually summarizes a particular data set well.

## Fake Data

I'm not going to work directly with my company's pay gap data (quit being so nosy!) though it will be public fairly soon if it is not already.
Instead I will work with an artificial data set which still illustrates the main ideas.

Imagine a company with two different roles, one of which is much higher paying than the other industry wide.
Let's call these roles A and B - they might be "manager" and "intern", for instance.
Assume that the employment figures by gender in these two roles are as follows:

| | A &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; | B &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; |
|---|---|---|
| Men | 5 | 9 |
| Women | 5 | 1 |

Thus there are 20 employees total, including 14 men and 6 women.
Assume that the hourly wages for these two roles are:

| | A &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; | B &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; |
|---|---|---|
| Men | 30 | 15 |
| Women | 20 | 10 |

There is a clear gender gap here: men in role A make ten dollars per hour more than their female counterparts, and men in role B make five dollars per hour more.
How should the company summarize this data set?

## Gender Gaps

The gender pay gap is simply defined to be the ratio of men's average salary to women's.  
It is typically reported as a percentage, so if the salary ratio is $1.2$ then the gender gap would be reported as $20\%$.
Let us calculate the gender pay gap at the hypothetical company above for the roles A and B separately and then for all employees together.

In role A the salary ratio is simply $\frac{30}{20} = 1.5$, so we would report the gender pay gap in that role as $50\%$.
The gender pay gap in role B is the same: $\frac{15}{10} = 1.5$, or $50\%$ once again.
So surely our gender pay gap report should say that the gap is $50\%$; after all, each man in the company makes $50\%$ more than his female peers.

But in practice there is no guarantee (or requirement!) that the company will report pay gaps by role, and so the company is more likely to compute the company-wide average salary for men and women and then compute the gap using those two numbers.

The average salary for men is given by:

$$\frac{5 \cdot 30 + 9 \cdot 15}{14} = 20.36$$

The average salary for women is:

$$\frac{5 \cdot 20 + 1 \cdot 10}{6} = 18.33$$

Therefore the overall gender gap is:

$$\frac{20.36}{18.33} = 1.11$$

or in other words $11\%$.

## What???

Something is very wrong here.
On one hand, a casual glance at the data shows that the company has a severe gender pay gap problem: it is systematically paying men $50\%$ more than women in each role.
On the other hand, a seemingly reasonable calculation suggests that the problem isn't so bad at all: the gender pay gap is only $11\%$, which is less than the national average in the US.
How are we to make sense of this?

The answer, as always, is to return to the fundamentals.
In my [blog post][3] on averages, I wrote:

<center>
    <p>
        <em>An average of a collection of numbers is a value which can be used as a proxy for a "typical" number in the collection.</em>
    </p>
</center>

Now the error is much clearer: when we computed that the company-wide average salary for men is $20.36$ dollars per hour we were treating this number as a proxy for a typical man at the company even though not a single man makes this salary.
Similarly, we cannot treat $18.33$ dollars per hour as a reasonable summary of the salaries of women a the company.
By doing so, we are implicitly comparing salaries of women in the higher-paying role A to those of men in the lower-paying role B, and the fact that this comparison is favorable to women obscures the very real possibility of systematic bias in the hiring practices within each role.

This is an example of a data set where we simply cannot compute an average: the numbers are being drawn from two different distributions corresponding to the roles A and B, and we suppress the real structure of the data by trying to summarize them with a single value.

## Alternatives

In hindsight computing the company wide average in my example might seem like a deliberate attempt to hide or downplay gender bias, but in practice this error is extremely difficult to avoid and is almost certainly not made maliciously.
The real pattern is clear when you know ahead of time to organize the data by role, but salaries can vary along numerous other axes such as experience, education, location, and performance.

In order to fully account for the gender pay gap one must isolate all "legitimate" sources of variation to ensure that no improper comparisons are being made.
For instance, at my company the salaries of American women might compare favorably to those of British men, but this should not be used as evidence to refute the existence of a gender pay gap since the cost of living, and hence the salaries, are higher generally in New York compared to Brighton.
But it is extremely difficult to build a representation of real-world salary data which accounts for all statistically significant subpopulations; such representations are called [mixture models][4] and they are among the more difficult models to parameterize.

So this is a very serious statistics problem, and I don't claim that I can solve it definitively in one blog post.
Still, I will propose an example of an alternative calculation which avoids at least some of the problems of the raw company-wide average.

1. Identify a concrete set of independent variables along which reasonable comparisons can be made.  For instance, one might group people by both location and role, so that a British sales representative will be compared only to other British sales representatives.

2. Compute the mean and standard deviation of salaries within each group.  For groups containing only a small number of people it may be necessary to incorporate external salary data on similar groups (e.g. the same role in the same location).

3. Fit the salaries within each group to a bell curve with the mean and standard deviation above, and then normalize all of the bell curves so that they have the same mean and standard deviation.  Apply this normalization to the salary data, yielding a new data set in which all values fit on the same scale.

4. Compute the averages of the normalized values for men and for women and compare.

To summarize, we can use our understanding of the structure of the data to normalize the salary numbers so that they become mutually comparable.

## Conclusion

The approach proposed above is certainly not perfect - it likely requires reliable industry-level salary data, and it might underemphasize biases at the highest level of the organization.
But comparing raw company-wide averages is capable only of detecting the most outlandishly biased organizations wherein the lowest paid men receive a comparable salary to the highest paid women.
Real world pay gaps are generally more subtle, and taking them seriously requires more refined analysis.

At Brandwatch we have some very bright people in our operations team, and they were careful to slice and dice the salary numbers in various different ways, including by department and by country.
I don't know the details of their methodology, but they have not fallen into the trap of computing only the global salary average and moving on (we are, after all, a data company).
But this is above and beyond the actual reporting requirements, and I'm worried more broadly about how the results of the UK reporting law will be used and interpretted.

[1]: https://www.brandwatch.com/ "Brandwatch"
[2]: http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/09/gender-pay-gap-facts/ "Gender pay gap"
[3]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url math/2017-03-11-averages %} "What's in a mean?"
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mixture_model "Mixture model"
