---
layout: post
permalink: /this-blog/
title: How this Blog Works
abstract: It took some time and effort to get this blog working just as I wanted, so I thought I would record what I learned here for others.
date: 2017-03-05
categories: stage
---

I used to blog a bit on WordPress, but I was never able to get into it quite as much as I had hoped.  Part of the problem was the WordPress software's rather clunky support for typesetting mathematics (a subject about which I am known to write from time to time).  For instance, to write a sentence like:

<center>
<p>For every $\eps$ there exists $\delta$ such that $\abs{f(x) - \ell} < \eps$ whenever $0 < \abs{x - a} < \delta$</p>
</center>

the syntax is:

    For every $latex \varepsilon$ there exists $latex delta$ such that $latex \left| f(x) - \ell \right| < \varepsilon$ whenever $latex 0 < \left| x - a \right| < \delta$

Notice that the string `latex` must be included between every pair of dollar signs, a task which gets very annoying very fast.  On top of that there is no support for theorem environments or macros.  Some of this can be resolved by hosting one's own WordPress blog, but that simply adds a monthly expense while binding you to a framework that you may or may not want.

So recently I switched over to Github pages, and after a bit of configuration it has turned out to meet nearly all of my needs (for free!)  The syntax for the sentence above is now:

    For every $\eps$ there exists $\delta$ such that $\abs{f(x) - \ell} < \eps$ whenever $0 < \abs{x - a} < \delta$

(Notice the Latex macros `\eps` and `\abs{}`!)  In this post I'm going to go over how Github pages works and what configuration I did to get things set up.

## Requirements

Before making the switch I made a mental list of requirements that I sought from a blogging platform.  It looked something like this:

* Support for [Markdown][1], a basic language that simplifies typical formatting tasks like section headers, lists, links, and so on.
* Support for Latex, including theorem environments, macros, and commutative diagrams.
* Support for HTML and Javascript, so that I can embed Javascript widgets in my page if I so desire.
* Compatibility with git and Github so that I can edit posts offline and use version control
* Robust tools for organizing and categorizing pages
* A comment section

WordPress supports some of these natively (perhaps more for those who self-host), but I was not particularly optimistic that I would find a platform which satisfies all of them.  But Github Pages exceeded my expectations, and now I can have my cake and eat it too.  This is made possible by combining four different (free) technologies:

1. [Github Pages][2]: Hosts and builds the page, fully integrated with Github's version control capabilities
2. [Jekyll][3]: Static site generator, natively supported by Github Pages
3. [MathJax][4]: Javascript-based Latex renderer
4. [Disqus][5]: Comment thread plugin

It may seem a bit daunting, but in fact these four tools work very well together.  For those who are already familiar with Latex and git the main learning curve is Jekyll, but for basic things Jekyll is quite straightforward, very well documented, and very well integrated with Github.  It natively supports a Markdown parser called [kramdown][6], and with a little poking and prodding kramdown plays very nicely with MathJax.  The primary skill necessary to set all of this up and get started is patience; it is necessary to modify some Javascript and HTML code here and there, but I don't think you need to know those tools very well to make it work.

## Basic Setup: Jekyll + Github

Getting started is shockingly simple, and I have nothing in particular to add to the [official instructions][2]: just create a repository called `username.github.io` in your Github account (where `username`) is your Github username.  You are now ready to build a website: if you add a file called `index.html` (or alternatively `README.md` if you prefer Markdown) to the root directory of this repository then that page will be available at the url `https://username.github.io/`.

If you are an expert in CSS then I'll shut up and let you go off and do your thing; for the rest of us there is a shortcut for making our pages look nice: under the "Options" tab in the repository's settings is a section called "Theme Chooser" which will allow you to pick a Jekyll theme for your page.  This tells Github pages to let Jekyll run the show, and adds a file called `_config.yml` to the repository which simply specifies whatever theme you picked.

Let's chat a bit about Jekyll.  If you step back for a moment and imagine the task of manually setting up a blog in raw HTML, you will quickly become overwhelmed.  You would probably want to maintain each blog post as a separate file, but you would want to be able to load all of the posts (or at least links to the posts) into a single page.  Moreover you might want one page which loads only your vacation posts and another which loads only your political rants, and you might want to apply different formatting configurations to each page type.  And of course everything should be sorted reverse chronologically.

All of that would probably be doable with a bit of Javascript hacking but without some serious thought it would get disorganized and difficult to maintain.  This is where Jekyll comes in: it organizes your site into a data structure and exposes

## Structuring the Blog












[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown "Markdown"
[2]: https://pages.github.com/ "Github Pages"
[3]: https://jekyllrb.com/ "Jekyll"
[4]: https://www.mathjax.org/ "MathJax"
[5]: https://disqus.com/ "Disqus"
[6]: https://kramdown.gettalong.org/ "kramdown"
